# Cross‑Efficiency Evaluation Method with Performance Level as a Management Objective in Consideration of Bounded Rationality

**Authors:** Hai‑Liu Shi, Ying‑Ming Wang, Xiao‑Ming Zhang
**Source:** International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems (2024) 17:244
**DOI:** https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-024-00650-1

## Abstract

According to **management by objectives (MBO)** theory, the significance of management objectives must be considered as a reference point in a performance evaluation. Cross efficiency evaluation has always been considered to be one of the important performance evaluation methods. However, few studies to date have considered the impact of management objectives on cross efficiency. According to **prospect theory**, the choice of reference point will cause irrational psychology in decision makers. A management objective is a natural reference point, which will cause a ‘gain and loss’ psychology in enterprises and may create irrational psychology. **Performance level** is an important index by which to evaluate resource allocation, which in turn can be regarded as an important enterprise management objective. This paper proposes a cross efficiency evaluation method based on performance level. Cross efficiency evaluation models are constructed, based on the irrational psychology that occurs under **organization objectives**, **personal objectives** and **composite objectives**. This method not only considers the bounded rational behavior of enterprises, but is also more flexible. A numerical example is given to illustrate the application of the bounded rational cross efficiency evaluation method in data envelopment analysis (DEA) ranking.

**Keywords:** Data envelopment analysis (DEA) · Cross efficiency evaluation · Prospect theory · Bounded rationality · Performance level

---

## 1 Introduction

**Data envelopment analysis (DEA)**, first proposed by Charnes et al. [1], is a non-parametric method used to evaluate **decision-making unit (DMU)** performance based on input and output data. In this method, the weights of the input and output indexes do not need to be given subjectively; they are objectively obtained through model optimization. The advantages of the DEA method have been generally recognized by scholars [9] [11] [20]. A traditional DEA model, such as the CCR model, will have multiple solutions of weights, leading to the problem of the full ranking of DMU performance.

In this regard, Sexton et al. [15] proposed **cross-efficiency**. The study regarded CCR efficiency as the decision-making unit based on self-evaluation efficiency, and achieved peer evaluation by introducing secondary objectives to optimize input and output weights. Doyle and Green [7] further proposed aggressive and benevolent cross-efficiency methods under three secondary objectives. As a performance evaluation tool, cross-efficiency evaluation has been widely studied and applied worldwide [5] [6].

Cross-efficiency evaluation is, in fact, a relative efficiency evaluation method with reference points that may be either efficient or inefficient frontiers [8] [12] [17] [21], or a DMU, such as ideal DMU (IDMU) or anti-ideal DMU (ADMU) [13] [18] [19], Shi et al., 2020), or interval reference points, which take the best production state and the worst production state as reference states (Huang, et al., [10]).

In performance evaluation, management objectives serve as an important measure for the degree of achievement of decision-making units. As a significant performance evaluation method, the cross-evaluation method should consider management objectives as a reference point. Many existing studies have also considered the reference point in cross-evaluation, but few have taken management objectives as the reference point.

According to management by objectives (MBO) as proposed by Drucker, management objectives are diverse, but regardless of the type of management objectives, they should abide by the **SMART** (specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and time-bound) principle. The reference points in existing research do not meet the principles of management objectives. This study proposes to use the relevant performance level as a reference point. The performance level is defined according to the application requirements (see definition), and is not limited to the optimal performance level. Thus, this approach conforms to the SMART principle of management objectives.

The theory of MBO was further developed by Odiorne in [14], and holds that management objectives should not only focus on the relationship between performance evaluation and management objectives, but should also consider the preferences (for example, attitude, rationality, irrationality, etc.) of decision makers. Prospect theory was put forward by Kahneman and Tversky in [14], and maintains that people will have bounded rational psychology when facing a reference point.

In conclusion, traditional cross-efficiency evaluation methods often use specific DMU or virtual DMU as the reference point for performance evaluation, rarely consider the role and significance of performance level as the reference point, and ignore the influence of bounded rationality on the behavior of decision-making units. Performance evaluation is the ranking of evaluated DMUs based on performance level. High level performance is the pursuit of all DMUs, so a high performance level is a natural management objective. The performance level value under the DEA method is between 0 and 1, and the value can be solved by a DEA model.

---

## 2 Theory Premise

### 2.1 Prospect Theory

Prospect theory is a theory describing the decision-making process of decision-makers in the face of risk. Risk preference on the part of decision-makers is inconsistent in the face of loss and profit; they become risk-seeking in the face of loss, while risk-averse in the face of profit. The choice and change of a reference point will affect the decision-maker’s perception of revenue and loss, and then affect the decision-making results. The value function of prospect theory is as follows:

$$
v(\Delta z) =
\begin{cases}
\Delta z^\alpha & \Delta z \ge 0 \\
-\lambda(-\Delta z)^\beta & \Delta z < 0
\end{cases}
\quad (1)
$$

where
$$
\Delta z =
\begin{cases}
u_0 - u & \text{when } u \text{ is cost} \\
u - u_0 & \text{when } u \text{ is profit}
\end{cases}
$$
when $\Delta z \ge 0$, there is a gain; when $\Delta z < 0$, there is a loss; $\alpha$ and $\beta$ represent the concavity and convexity of the regional value function of return and loss, respectively. Loss aversion coefficient $\lambda \ge 1$ indicates that the loss area is steeper than the income area. In this theory, there is an inflection point in the value function; that is, there is a so-called “reference point”.

### 2.2 Efficiency Evaluation

#### 2.2.1 Self‑Evaluation

Suppose there are $n$ DMUs to be evaluated with $m$ inputs and $s$ outputs. Denote by $x_{ij}$ ($i = 1, \dots, m$) and $y_{rj}$ ($r = 1, \dots, s$) the input and output values of $\text{DMU}_j$ ($j = 1, \dots, n$). Consider a DMU, say, $\text{DMU}_k$, $k \in \{1, \dots, n\}$, whose efficiency relative to the other DMUs can be measured by the following CCR model [1]:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\max \quad & \theta_{kk} = \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} = 1 \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rj} - \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ij} \le 0, \quad j = 1, \dots, n \\
& u_{rk} \ge \varepsilon, \quad r = 1, \dots, s \\
& v_{ik} \ge \varepsilon, \quad i = 1, \dots, m
\end{aligned}
\quad (2)
$$

where $\varepsilon$ is an infinitesimal. Let $u_{rk}^*$ ($r = 1, \dots, s$) and $v_{ik}^*$ ($i = 1, \dots, m$) be the optimal solution to Model (2). Then, $\theta_{kk}^* = \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk}^* y_{rk}$ is referred to as the CCR-efficiency of $\text{DMU}_k$. Also, $\theta_{jk} = \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk}^* y_{rj} / \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik}^* x_{ij}$ is referred to as a cross-efficiency of $\text{DMU}_j$ and reflects the peer evaluation of $\text{DMU}_k$ to $\text{DMU}_j$ ($j = 1, \dots, n; j \ne k$).

#### 2.2.2 Peer Evaluation

Scholars have proposed a variety of cross-evaluation models for different application problems, considering either the preference or the psychology of DMUs (Chen, [2]–[4]). However, few studies to date have considered the irrational psychology of DMUs. A study by Liu et al. [13] proposed one of the few cross-evaluation methods that consider the irrational psychology of DMUs. The cross-evaluation method considers the risk aversion of decision makers with the best and worst performing decision units as reference points. The best performing decision unit (IDMU) and the worst performing decision unit (ADMU) are defined, as can be seen in Definition 1 and Definition 2. Then, cross-evaluation models are constructed, taking IDMU and ADMU as reference points, and regarding both IDMU and ADMU as reference points.

**Definition 1 (IDMU):** Assume a virtual DMU is the ideal DMU, which can use the least input $x_i^{\min}$ to generate the most outputs $y_r^{\max}$; where $x_i^{\min} = \min_j \{x_{ij}\}$, $j = 1, 2, \dots, n$, $y_r^{\max} = \max_j \{y_{rj}\}$, $j = 1, 2, \dots, n$, denoted by IDMU.

**Definition 2 (ADMU):** Assume a virtual DMU is the anti-ideal DMU, which would use the most input $x_i^{\max}$ to generate the least outputs $y_r^{\min}$; where $x_i^{\max} = \max_j \{x_{ij}\}$, $i = 1, 2, \dots, n$, $y_r^{\min} = \min_j \{y_{rj}\}$, $i = 1, 2, \dots, n$, denoted by ADMU.

Shi et al. [16] further expanded ADMU and IDMU into interval DMU, which is defined in Definition 3.

**Definition 3:** Assume that there is a production possibility set which can use $m$ interval inputs $[a_i x_i^{\min}, b_i x_i^{\max}]$ ($i = 1, 2, \dots, m$), to generate $s$ interval outputs $[c_r y_r^{\min}, d_r y_r^{\max}]$ ($r = 1, 2, \dots, s$), where $a = (a_1, a_2, \dots, a_m)$, $b = (b_1, b_2, \dots, b_m)$, $c = (c_1, c_2, \dots, c_s)$ and $d = (d_1, d_2, \dots, d_s)$ are all vectors, and $1 \le a_i \le x_i^{\min}$, $x_i^{\max} \le b_i \le 1$, $i = 1, 2, \dots, m$, $1 \le c_r \le y_r^{\min}$, $y_r^{\max} \le d_r \le 1$, $r = 1, 2, \dots, s$, and $x_i^{\min} > 0$, $x_i^{\max} > 0$, $y_r^{\max} > 0$, $y_r^{\min} > 0$. This is called an interval-DMU.

The cross-evaluation model taking interval-DMU as a reference point is shown as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\max \quad & W_k^{\text{interval}} = \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} w_{ik}^{\text{interval-in}} + \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} w_{rk}^{\text{interval-out}} \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} - \theta_{kk}^* \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} = 0 \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rj} - \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ij} \le 0, \quad j = 1, \dots, n \\
& u_{rk} \ge \varepsilon, \quad r = 1, \dots, s \\
& v_{ik} \ge \varepsilon, \quad i = 1, \dots, m
\end{aligned}
\quad (3)
$$

where $\theta_{kk}^*$ is the self-evaluation efficiency of $\text{DMU}_k$ obtained using Model (2). Also, $u_{rk}$ ($r = 1, \dots, s$) and $v_{ik}$ ($i = 1, \dots, m$) are decision variables. The objective function is the prospect value of $\text{DMU}_k$, based on interval-DMU. The model unifies multiple data types of reference points, but the model is too complex.

---

## 3 Cross‑Efficiency Evaluation Models Based on Management Objectives

The DEA method is used to evaluate the performance of DMUs. According to the modeling ideas and meaning of the DEA method, each inefficient DMU can achieve improved efficiency through the adjustment of inputs and outputs. The DMU’s efficiency reflects the reasonable degree of resource allocation of the DMU, and DEA efficiency ranges from 0 to 1. That is, when the DEA efficiency is 1, the resource allocation of the DMU is optimal. Obviously, the DEA efficiency, as a management objective, is attainable, specific and measurable; therefore, this study uses DEA efficiency as the performance management objective.

In practical applications, management objectives have multiple levels, multiple angles and diversity. As a reference point for DMUs, an objective may be for all DMUs or a single DMU. When the management objective is the performance evaluation criterion of all DMUs, that objective is an **organizational objective**, which arises from the needs of either the industry or society. When the management objective is the evaluation criterion of a DMU, that objective is a **personal objective**, which is subjectively formulated by the DMU according to the status quo and needs. In fact, the performance evaluation of a DMU often has to simultaneously face both personal objectives and organizational objectives. We regard this management objective system (i.e., one that considers both organizational objectives and personal objectives) as a **composite objective**. The cross-efficiency evaluation models based on personal objectives, organizational objectives and composite objectives are constructed in consideration of bounded rationality.

**Assumption:** (1) Organizational objectives and personal objectives are consistent; that is, both organizational objectives and personal objectives urge the DMU to try its best to improve resource allocation (that is, to increase efficiency). (2) All DEA models in this study assume constant returns to scale.

### 3.1 Profit and Loss Model Under Management Objectives

**Definition 4:** There will be an equation [see Formula (4)], when $\text{DMU}_k$ is evaluated with $\theta^{MO}$ as a reference point to evaluate its peer $\text{DMU}_j$ ($j = 1, 2, \dots, n$) and $\theta^{MO} > \theta_{jj}^*$:

$$
\frac{\sum_{r=1}^s u_{rj} y_{rj} + \Delta y_j}{\sum_{i=1}^m v_{ij} x_{ij} - \Delta x_j} = \theta^{MO}, \quad 0 \le \Delta y_j, 0 \le \Delta x_j, \quad j = 1, 2, \dots, n
\quad (4)
$$

where $-\Delta x_j$ and $-\Delta y_j$ represent the redundancies in inputs and deficiencies in output, respectively, such that $S_{j1}^k = -\lambda(-\Delta y_j)^\beta - \lambda(-\Delta x_j)^\beta$ is defined as the **loss** of $\text{DMU}_j$, taking $\theta^{MO}$ as the reference point.

**Definition 5:** There is an equation, shown as Formula (5), when $\theta^{MO} \le \theta_{jj}^*$:

$$
\frac{\sum_{r=1}^s u_{rj} y_{rj} - \Delta y_j}{\sum_{i=1}^m v_{ij} x_{ij} + \Delta x_j} = \theta^{MO}, \quad 0 \le \Delta y_j, 0 \le \Delta x_j, \quad j = 1, 2, \dots, n
\quad (5)
$$

where $\Delta x_j$ and $\Delta y_j$ represent the savings in inputs and profits in output, respectively, such that $S_{j2}^k = (\Delta y_j)^\alpha + (\Delta x_j)^\alpha$ is defined as the **gain** of $\text{DMU}_j$, taking $\theta^{MO}$ as the reference point.

### 3.2 Cross‑Efficiency Evaluation Model Under Organizational Objectives

When the organizational objective $\theta^{OO}$ is less than the self-evaluation efficiency $\theta_{jj}^*$ of $\text{DMU}_j$, the cross-evaluation model with $\theta^{OO}$ as reference point, taking the prospect value $S_{j2}^k$ (gain) as the objective function, is shown as Model (6):

$$
\begin{aligned}
\min \quad & S_{j2}^k = (\Delta y_{j1})^\alpha + (\Delta x_{j1})^\alpha \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rj} - \Delta y_{j1} = \theta^{OO} \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ij} + \theta^{OO} \Delta x_{j1} \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} - \theta_{kk}^* \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} = 0 \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rt} - \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{it} \le 0, \quad t = 1, \dots, n; t \ne k \\
& u_{rk}, v_{ik} \ge \varepsilon; \quad 0 \le \Delta y_{j1}, 0 \le \Delta x_{j1}
\end{aligned}
\quad (6)
$$

When the organizational objective $\theta^{OO}$ is greater than the self-evaluation efficiency $\theta_{jj}^*$ of $\text{DMU}_j$ (peer of $\text{DMU}_k$), the cross-evaluation model, taking the prospect value $S_{j1}^k$ (loss) as the objective function, is shown as Model (7):

$$
\begin{aligned}
\max \quad & S_{j1}^k = -\lambda(-\Delta y_{j2})^\beta - \lambda(-\Delta x_{j2})^\beta \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rj} + \Delta y_{j2} = \theta^{OO} \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ij} - \theta^{OO} \Delta x_{j2} \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} - \theta_{kk}^* \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} = 0 \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rt} - \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{it} \le 0, \quad t = 1, \dots, n; t \ne k \\
& u_{rk}, v_{ik} \ge \varepsilon; \quad 0 \le \Delta y_{j2}, 0 \le \Delta x_{j2}
\end{aligned}
\quad (7)
$$

### 3.3 Cross‑Efficiency Evaluation Model Under Personal Objectives

When the personal objective $\theta^{PO}$ is less than the self-evaluation efficiency $\theta_{kk}^*$ of $\text{DMU}_k$, there is a savings in inputs and profits in output, which are all gains for $\text{DMU}_k$. The prospect value $S_{k1}^k$ (gain) is defined by the gains of $\text{DMU}_k$. The cross-evaluation model with $\theta^{PO}$ as the reference point takes $S_{k1}^k$ as the objective function; this is shown as Model (8):

$$
\begin{aligned}
\max \quad & S_{k1}^k = (\Delta y_{k1})^\alpha + (\Delta x_{k1})^\alpha \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} - \Delta y_{k1} = \theta^{PO} \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} + \theta^{PO} \Delta x_{k1} \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} - \theta_{kk}^* \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} = 0 \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rj} - \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ij} \le 0, \quad j = 1, \dots, n; j \ne k \\
& u_{rk}, v_{ik} \ge \varepsilon; \quad 0 \le \Delta y_{k1}, 0 \le \Delta x_{k1}
\end{aligned}
\quad (8)
$$

Conversely, when the personal objective $\theta^{PO}$ is greater than the self-evaluation efficiency $\theta_{kk}^*$ of $\text{DMU}_k$, there are redundancies in inputs and deficiencies in outputs, which are all losses for $\text{DMU}_k$. The prospect value $S_{k2}^k$ (loss) is defined by the losses of $\text{DMU}_k$. The cross-efficiency evaluation model maximizing the prospect value $S_{k2}^k$ is shown as Model (9):

$$
\begin{aligned}
\max \quad & S_{k2}^k = -\lambda(-\Delta y_{k2})^\beta - \lambda(-\Delta x_{k2})^\beta \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} + \Delta y_{k2} = \theta^{PO} \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} - \theta^{PO} \Delta x_{k2} \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rk} - \theta_{kk}^* \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ik} = 0 \\
& \sum_{r=1}^s u_{rk} y_{rj} - \sum_{i=1}^m v_{ik} x_{ij} \le 0, \quad j = 1, \dots, n; j \ne k \\
& u_{rk}, v_{ik} \ge \varepsilon; \quad 0 \le \Delta y_{k2}, 0 \le \Delta x_{k2}
\end{aligned}
\quad (9)
$$

### 3.4 Calculation of Cross Efficiency

Parameter $\lambda$, $\alpha$ and $\beta$ (see Sect. 2.1) reflects the bounded rationality of DMUs, which is determined in line with people’s psychology through empirical research (Rieger et al., 2017; Tversky and Kahneman, 1992). This study focuses on the cross evaluation method based on the existing research results of psychological parameters. The psychological parameters will directly use the research results of Tversky and Kahneman; that is, $\alpha = \beta = 0.88$, and $\lambda = 2.25$. In this study, management objectives are divided into organizational objectives, personal objectives and composite objectives.

**Composite Objectives:** The cross efficiency under composite objectives ($\theta^{CO}$) is calculated by the following formula:

$$
\theta^{CO} = \theta^{OO} \times \mu + \theta^{PO} \times (1-\mu)
$$

---

## 4 Illustration Example

In this section, an example in the energy industry is used to illustrate the effectiveness and rationality of the cross efficiency evaluation method proposed in this study. The data used in this example comes from the 2018 Annual Performance Statistics Report of energy enterprises, provided by the Fujian Science and Technology Bureau. The source data involves 23 enterprises. To avoid disclosing enterprise information, the data has been anonymized (with enterprise names hidden) and represented as DMUs.

**Table 1: Description of source data**

| | Input | Output | | | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | R&D Personnel | R&D Expenses (thousands) | Product Sales Revenue (thousands) | New product sales revenue (thousands) | Total profit (thousands) | Net profit (thousands) |
| DMU1 | 4 | 4045.2 | 108.8 | 4 | 225.4 | 121.1 |
| $\dots$ | $\dots$ | $\dots$ | $\dots$ | $\dots$ | $\dots$ | $\dots$ |
| DMU23 | 27 | 3248 | 78 | 0 | 3340 | $-4249$ |
| Max. | 132,712.49 | 273,103 | 81,870 | 199,285 | 16,392 | 58,347.56 |
| Min. | 2314.73 | 108.8 | 78 | 0 | 225.4 | $-63,113$ |

Before processing the data using the model proposed in this paper, the following steps were taken: (1) preprocessing the source data by deleting invalid data points, resulting in the removal of 2 invalid entries and leaving 21 valid entries; (2) due to the strong endogeneity between “net profit” and “total profit”, and their small data difference making them interchangeable, only one was selected, with “net profit” chosen as one of the output indicators; (3) using the ratio of “new product sales revenue” to “product sales revenue” as a new output indicator, “new product sales revenue rate” to eliminate the end-ogeneity between these two indicators; (4) converting the units of “net profit” and “R&D expenses” from “thousand” to “million”; and (5) standardizing the “net profit” data to address the issue of negative values.

**Table 2: Description of preprocessed data**

| | Inputs | | Outputs | | CCR efficiency |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | $x_1$: R&D Personnel | $x_2$: R&D Expenses (million) | $y_1$: New Product Sales Revenue Rate | $y_2$: Net Profit (million) | |
| DMU1 | 4 | 4.0452 | 0.03 | 0.1211 | 1 |
| DMU2 | 7 | 2.25 | 0.18 | 0.55 | 0.6177 |
| DMU3 | 15 | 13.37 | 0.95 | 0.56 | 0.7932 |
| DMU4 | 60 | 44.88 | 0.99 | 0 | 0.2241 |
| DMU5 | 49 | 90.93 | 0.56 | 0.73 | 0.2436 |
| DMU6 | 90 | 30.96 | 0.12 | 0.80 | 0.1971 |
| DMU7 | 26 | 16.92 | 0.77 | 0.55 | 0.4053 |
| DMU8 | 46 | 37.05 | 0.85 | 0.67 | 0.2354 |
| DMU9 | 6 | 125.70 | 0.43 | 0.56 | 1 |
| DMU10 | 5 | 7.51 | 0.25 | 0.55 | 0.9475 |
| DMU11 | 5 | 18.69 | 0.08 | 0.55 | 0.8 |
| DMU12 | 20 | 8.56 | 1 | 0.71 | 0.6976 |
| DMU13 | 13 | 21.90 | 0.001 | 0.54 | 0.4527 |
| DMU14 | 4 | 4.88 | 0.14 | 0.55 | 1 |
| DMU15 | 14 | 2.34 | 1 | 0.55 | 1 |
| DMU16 | 15 | 13.91 | 0.47 | 0.55 | 1 |
| DMU17 | 14 | 4.90 | 0.71 | 0.56 | 0.6849 |
| DMU18 | 12 | 23.47 | 1 | 0.55 | 1 |
| DMU19 | 25 | 45.63 | 0.27 | 1 | 0.2951 |
| DMU20 | 5 | 81.18 | 0.02 | 0.55 | 0.8 |
| DMU21 | 27 | 8.85 | 0.62 | 0.60 | 0.3005 |

All psychological parameters related to cross efficiency are $\alpha = \beta = 0.71$, $\lambda = 2.25$.

### 4.1 Cross Evaluation Based on Organizational Objectives

Seven different organizational objectives are selected for the example, namely $\theta^{OO-1} = 0.4$, $\theta^{OO-2} = 0.5$, $\theta^{OO-3} = 0.6$, $\theta^{OO-4} = 0.7$, $\theta^{OO-5} = 0.8$, $\theta^{OO-6} = 0.9$ and $\theta^{OO-7} = 1$.

**Table 3: Cross efficiency and CCR-efficiency of the 21 DMUs under the seven organizational objectives**

| | $\theta^{OO-1}$ | $\theta^{OO-2}$ | $\theta^{OO-3}$ | $\theta^{OO-4}$ | $\theta^{OO-5}$ | $\theta^{OO-6}$ | $\theta^{OO-7}$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| DMU1 | 0.4815 | 0.6728 | 0.7195 | 0.7586 | 0.7958 | 0.8446 | 0.4815 |
| DMU2 | 0.3614 | 0.4804 | 0.5226 | 0.3614 | 0.3614 | 0.3614 | 0.3614 |
| DMU3 | 0.4887 | 0.5901 | 0.6062 | 0.6332 | 0.4887 | 0.4887 | 0.4887 |
| DMU4 | 0.1236 | 0.1207 | 0.1235 | 0.1236 | 0.1236 | 0.1236 | 0.1236 |
| DMU5 | 0.1501 | 0.1501 | 0.1501 | 0.1501 | 0.1501 | 0.1501 | 0.1501 |
| DMU6 | 0.0586 | 0.0572 | 0.0572 | 0.0572 | 0.0586 | 0.0586 | 0.0586 |
| DMU7 | 0.2784 | 0.277 | 0.277 | 0.277 | 0.2784 | 0.2784 | 0.2784 |
| DMU8 | 0.153 | 0.153 | 0.153 | 0.153 | 0.153 | 0.153 | 0.153 |
| DMU9 | 0.8017 | 0.8361 | 0.8503 | 0.8695 | 0.8924 | 0.9182 | 0.8017 |
| DMU10 | 0.5251 | 0.616 | 0.6405 | 0.6819 | 0.7236 | 0.7595 | 0.5251 |
| DMU11 | 0.3637 | 0.5197 | 0.5689 | 0.6134 | 0.3586 | 0.3586 | 0.3637 |
| DMU12 | 0.4946 | 0.568 | 0.5974 | 0.4946 | 0.4946 | 0.4946 | 0.4946 |
| DMU13 | 0.1521 | 0.1488 | 0.1488 | 0.1521 | 0.1521 | 0.1521 | 0.1521 |
| DMU14 | 0.7558 | 0.7775 | 0.8043 | 0.8405 | 0.8872 | 0.9267 | 0.7558 |
| DMU15 | 0.6898 | 0.7617 | 0.7838 | 0.8097 | 0.8341 | 0.8701 | 0.6898 |
| DMU16 | 0.4637 | 0.5406 | 0.5901 | 0.6436 | 0.6911 | 0.7239 | 0.4637 |
| DMU17 | 0.4675 | 0.5503 | 0.579 | 0.4675 | 0.4675 | 0.4675 | 0.4675 |
| DMU18 | 0.6054 | 0.7033 | 0.7204 | 0.7465 | 0.7719 | 0.797 | 0.6054 |
| DMU19 | 0.1486 | 0.1486 | 0.1486 | 0.1486 | 0.1486 | 0.1486 | 0.1486 |
| DMU20 | 0.2702 | 0.4904 | 0.5378 | 0.5866 | 0.2629 | 0.2629 | 0.2702 |
| DMU21 | 0.1989 | 0.1989 | 0.1989 | 0.1989 | 0.1989 | 0.1989 | 0.1989 |

### 4.2 Cross Evaluation Results Based on Personal Objectives

Seven groups of personal objectives are selected for each enterprise, as shown in Table 4.

**Table 4: Seven personal objectives of 21 DMUs**

| | $\theta^{PO-1}$ | $\theta^{PO-2}$ | $\theta^{PO-3}$ | $\theta^{PO-4}$ | $\theta^{PO-5}$ | $\theta^{PO-6}$ | $\theta^{PO-7}$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| D1 | 1 | 0.7 | 0.75 | 0.8 | 0.85 | 0.9 | 0.95 |
| D2 | 1 | 1 | 0.7 | 0.75 | 0.8 | 0.85 | 0.9 |
| D3 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0.7 | 0.75 | 0.8 | 0.85 |
| D4 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0.7 | 0.75 | 0.8 |
| D5 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0.7 | 0.75 |
| D6 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0.7 |
| D7 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D8 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D9 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D10 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D11 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D12 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D13 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D14 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D15 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D16 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D17 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D18 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D19 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D20 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| D21 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |

*For simplicity in formatting, "D" represents "DMU"*

**Table 5: Cross efficiency of 21 DMUs under seven personal objectives**

| | $\theta^{PO-1}$ | $\theta^{PO-2}$ | $\theta^{PO-3}$ | $\theta^{PO-4}$ | $\theta^{PO-5}$ | $\theta^{PO-6}$ | $\theta^{PO-7}$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| DMU1 | 0.5427 | 0.5367 | 0.5425 | 0.545 | 0.5347 | 0.5408 | 0.5444 |
| DMU2 | 0.3707 | 0.3737 | 0.3702 | 0.3706 | 0.3723 | 0.3726 | 0.3702 |
| DMU3 | 0.4998 | 0.5006 | 0.4989 | 0.4988 | 0.499 | 0.4994 | 0.4997 |
| DMU4 | 0.1257 | 0.1269 | 0.1276 | 0.127 | 0.1268 | 0.128 | 0.1269 |
| DMU5 | 0.156 | 0.156 | 0.1561 | 0.1555 | 0.1563 | 0.1564 | 0.1562 |
| DMU6 | 0.0709 | 0.0715 | 0.0714 | 0.0707 | 0.0705 | 0.0709 | 0.0715 |
| DMU7 | 0.2828 | 0.287 | 0.2871 | 0.2834 | 0.2834 | 0.2837 | 0.2824 |
| DMU8 | 0.1564 | 0.1568 | 0.1563 | 0.1565 | 0.1563 | 0.1569 | 0.1564 |
| DMU9 | 0.8196 | 0.8166 | 0.8142 | 0.8146 | 0.8164 | 0.8146 | 0.8139 |
| DMU10 | 0.5398 | 0.5466 | 0.5381 | 0.5376 | 0.5402 | 0.5377 | 0.5381 |
| DMU11 | 0.3755 | 0.3741 | 0.3782 | 0.3764 | 0.3769 | 0.3794 | 0.3824 |
| DMU12 | 0.5113 | 0.5064 | 0.5123 | 0.5097 | 0.5072 | 0.5074 | 0.5068 |
| DMU13 | 0.1748 | 0.1804 | 0.1793 | 0.1781 | 0.1802 | 0.1789 | 0.1789 |
| DMU14 | 0.7997 | 0.7972 | 0.8002 | 0.7994 | 0.8026 | 0.798 | 0.7975 |
| DMU15 | 0.7272 | 0.7049 | 0.7091 | 0.7144 | 0.7112 | 0.7142 | 0.7254 |
| DMU16 | 0.5117 | 0.5142 | 0.5109 | 0.5185 | 0.5146 | 0.5128 | 0.5135 |
| DMU17 | 0.4791 | 0.4754 | 0.4756 | 0.4776 | 0.4769 | 0.4768 | 0.4834 |
| DMU18 | 0.6181 | 0.6189 | 0.619 | 0.619 | 0.6198 | 0.6194 | 0.6184 |
| DMU19 | 0.155 | 0.1528 | 0.1528 | 0.153 | 0.1527 | 0.1535 | 0.1528 |
| DMU20 | 0.2899 | 0.2839 | 0.2855 | 0.286 | 0.2857 | 0.283 | 0.2865 |
| DMU21 | 0.2033 | 0.2037 | 0.2043 | 0.2032 | 0.2035 | 0.2038 | 0.2042 |

### 4.3 Evaluation Results Under Composite Objectives

Assuming that organizational objectives are as important as personal objectives ($\mu = 0.5$):

$$
\theta^{CO} = \theta^{OO} \times 0.5 + \theta^{PO} \times 0.5
$$

**Table 6: Cross efficiency of 21 DMUs under seven composite objectives**

| | $\theta^{CO-1}$ | $\theta^{CO-2}$ | $\theta^{CO-3}$ | $\theta^{CO-4}$ | $\theta^{CO-5}$ | $\theta^{CO-6}$ | $\theta^{CO-7}$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| DMU1 | 0.506 | 0.6047 | 0.631 | 0.6518 | 0.6652 | 0.6927 | 0.5129 |
| DMU2 | 0.3651 | 0.4271 | 0.4464 | 0.366 | 0.3668 | 0.367 | 0.3658 |
| DMU3 | 0.4932 | 0.5454 | 0.5525 | 0.566 | 0.4939 | 0.4941 | 0.4942 |
| DMU4 | 0.1244 | 0.1238 | 0.1256 | 0.1253 | 0.1252 | 0.1258 | 0.1252 |
| DMU5 | 0.1524 | 0.153 | 0.1531 | 0.1528 | 0.1532 | 0.1532 | 0.1531 |
| DMU6 | 0.0635 | 0.0644 | 0.0643 | 0.0639 | 0.0646 | 0.0648 | 0.065 |
| DMU7 | 0.2802 | 0.282 | 0.282 | 0.2802 | 0.2809 | 0.2811 | 0.2804 |
| DMU8 | 0.1543 | 0.1549 | 0.1546 | 0.1547 | 0.1546 | 0.1549 | 0.1547 |
| DMU9 | 0.8089 | 0.8263 | 0.8322 | 0.842 | 0.8544 | 0.8664 | 0.8078 |
| DMU10 | 0.531 | 0.5813 | 0.5893 | 0.6098 | 0.6319 | 0.6486 | 0.5316 |
| DMU11 | 0.3685 | 0.4469 | 0.4735 | 0.4949 | 0.3678 | 0.369 | 0.3731 |
| DMU12 | 0.5013 | 0.5372 | 0.5548 | 0.5021 | 0.5009 | 0.501 | 0.5007 |
| DMU13 | 0.1612 | 0.1646 | 0.1641 | 0.1651 | 0.1662 | 0.1655 | 0.1655 |
| DMU14 | 0.7734 | 0.7873 | 0.8022 | 0.8199 | 0.8449 | 0.8623 | 0.7767 |
| DMU15 | 0.7047 | 0.7333 | 0.7464 | 0.7621 | 0.7727 | 0.7922 | 0.7076 |
| DMU16 | 0.4829 | 0.5274 | 0.5505 | 0.581 | 0.6029 | 0.6183 | 0.4886 |
| DMU17 | 0.4722 | 0.5128 | 0.5273 | 0.4726 | 0.4722 | 0.4722 | 0.4755 |
| DMU18 | 0.6105 | 0.6611 | 0.6697 | 0.6827 | 0.6958 | 0.7082 | 0.6119 |
| DMU19 | 0.1512 | 0.1507 | 0.1507 | 0.1508 | 0.1507 | 0.1511 | 0.1507 |
| DMU20 | 0.2781 | 0.3871 | 0.4117 | 0.4363 | 0.2743 | 0.273 | 0.2784 |
| DMU21 | 0.2007 | 0.2013 | 0.2016 | 0.2011 | 0.2012 | 0.2014 | 0.2016 |

---

## 5 Conclusions

Cross-efficiency evaluation is an important performance evaluation method for ranking DMUs. Most existing studies have often taken DMUs, which are virtual or specific, as the evaluation criteria. However, as the management objective, the evaluation criteria are representative and one-sided. Performance level is selected as the management objective in this paper to reflect the bounded psychology of the DMUs when facing the management objective. Organizational objectives, personal objectives and composite objectives are the reference points for performance evaluation. The DMUs whose performance levels are higher than the management objectives will receive expanded excellent scores from peers. Meanwhile, DMUs whose performance levels are lower than the management objectives will obtain expanded negative scores from peers. The corresponding management methods proposed by this paper should be set according to different application backgrounds, to increase the flexibility of cross efficiency evaluation methods. To confront the risk avoidance psychology of DMUs, cross efficiency evaluation models based on prospect theory are constructed in this study to improve the applicability of the method.

**Impact and Significance at the Policy Level:**

1.  **More Accurate Assessment:** The cross-efficiency evaluation method, which accounts for bounded rationality, incorporates actual performance levels as management objectives, better aligning with real-world conditions. This approach enables policymakers to more accurately assess the actual performance of various decision-making units, thereby avoiding biases from overly idealized frontier settings and enhancing the scientific and rational foundation of policy formulation.
2.  **Effective Resource Allocation:** By accurately assessing performance levels DMUs, policymakers can allocate resources more effectively. For instance, in distributing public resources, the government can prioritize allocation based on each unit’s performance, optimizing efficiency and enhancing social welfare.
3.  **Development of Targeted Measures:** By using cross-efficiency evaluation with performance levels as management objectives, policymakers can assess how decision-making units perform under various performance targets. This helps identify which units excel and which fall short, enabling policymakers to develop targeted measures to improve overall management performance.

---

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 71801048), Social Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. FJ2022B059; FJ2021B145) and Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. 2021J011229; 2023J011095).

**Author Contributions:** Shi H. L. and Zhang X. M. wrote the main manuscript text and Wang Y. M. prepared Figs. 1–3. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

**Data Availability:** No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

**Declarations:** Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.

---

## References

[1] Charnes, A., Cooper, W.W., Rhodes, E.: Measuring the efficiency of decision making units. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2(6), 429–444 (1978)
[2] Chen, L., Wang, Y.M.: DEA target setting approach within the cross efficiency framework. Omega Int. J. Manag. Sci. 96, 102072 (2020)
[3] Chen, L., Wang, Y.M., Huang, Y.: Cross-efficiency aggregation method based on prospect consensus process. Ann. Oper. Res. 288, 115–135 (2020)
[4] Chen, L., Huang, Y., Li, M.J., Wang, Y.M.: Meta-frontier analysis using cross-efficiency method for performance evaluation. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 280(1), 219–229 (2020)
[5] Cook, W.D., Seiford, L.M.: Data envelopment analysis (DEA)–thirty years on. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 192(1), 1–17 (2009)
[6] Cummins, J.D., Xie, X.: Mergers and acquisitions in the US property-liability insurance industry: productivity and efficiency effects. J. Bank. Finance 32(1), 30–55 (2008)
[7] Doyle, J., Green, R.: Efficiency and cross-efficiency in DEA: derivations, meanings and uses. J. Oper. Res. Soc. 45(5), 567–578 (1994)
[8] Ganji, S.R.S., Rassafi, A.A., Xu, D.L.: A double frontier dea cross efficiency method aggregated by evidential reasoning approach for measuring road safety performance. Measurement 136, 668–688 (2019)
[9] Hakim, S., Seifi, A., Ghaemi, A.: A bi-level formulation for DEA-based centralized resource allocation under efficiency constraints. Comput. Ind. Eng. 93, 28–35 (2016)
[10] Huang, Y., He, X., Dai, Y., et al.: Hybrid game cross efficiency evaluation models based on interval data: a case of forest carbon sequestration. Expert Syst. Appl. 204(10), 117521 (2022)
[11] Kwon, H.B., Lee, J.: Two-stage production modeling of large US banks: a DEA-neural network approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 42(19), 6758–6766 (2015)
[12] Lim, S., Zhu, J.: Primal-dual correspondence and frontier projections in two-stage network DEA models. Omega 83, 236–248 (2019)
[13] Liu, H.H., Song, Y.Y., Yang, G.L.: Cross-efficiency evaluation in data envelopment analysis based on prospect theory. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 273, 364–375 (2019)
[14] Odiorne, G.S.: Management by objectives: a system of managerial leadership. Pitman Press, Marshfield, Massachusetts (1965)
[15] Sexton, T.R., Silkman, R.H., Hogan, A.J.: Data envelopment analysis: critique and extensions. New Dir. Progr. Eval. 1986(32), 73–105 (1986)
[16] Shi, H.L., Chen, S.Q., Chen, L., Wang, Y.M.: A neutral cross-efficiency evaluation method based on interval reference points in consideration of bounded rational behavior. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 290(3), 1098–1110 (2021)
[17] Shi, H.L., Wang, Y.M., Chen, L.: Neutral cross-efficiency evaluation regarding an ideal frontier and anti-ideal frontier as evaluation criteria. Comput. Ind. Eng. 132, 385–394 (2019)
[18] Wang, Y.M., Chin, K.S.: A neutral DEA model for cross-efficiency evaluation and its extension. Expert Syst. Appl. 37(5), 3666–3675 (2010)
[19] Wang, Y.M., Chin, K.S., Luo, Y.: Cross-efficiency evaluation based on ideal and anti-ideal decision making units. Expert Syst. Appl. 38(8), 10312–10319 (2011)
[20] Zha, Y., Zhao, L., Bian, Y.: Measuring regional efficiency of energy and carbon dioxide emissions in China: a chance constrained DEA approach. Comput. Oper. Res. 66, 351–361 (2016)
[21] Zhou, Z., Xiao, H., Jin, Q., Liu, W.: DEA frontier improvement and portfolio rebalancing: an application of China mutual funds on considering sustainability information disclosure. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 269(1), 111–131 (2017)
